---
title: EU funding programmes for SMEs — overview
source_url: https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/access-finance_en
source_type: ec-portal
language: en
---
Overview of the main EU-level funding routes relevant to small and
medium-sized enterprises. Figures are indicative of the 2021–2027 programming
period; calls, rates and ceilings change per work programme, so the linked
official portals are authoritative.

Horizon Europe is the EU's research and innovation framework programme
(2021–2027) with an overall budget of around EUR 95.5 billion. SMEs
participate in collaborative research projects (typical funding rates of 70%
for innovation actions and up to 100% for research and innovation actions)
and through the European Innovation Council.

The European Innovation Council (EIC) Accelerator supports individual startups
and SMEs developing breakthrough innovations. It provides grant funding of up
to EUR 2.5 million, which can be combined with an equity investment component
(historically in the range of EUR 0.5 to 15 million) through the EIC Fund.
Applications are submitted by a single company; there is a short application,
a full application and a jury interview stage.

The Digital Europe Programme funds digital capacity building — artificial
intelligence, cybersecurity, advanced digital skills and the network of
European Digital Innovation Hubs (EDIHs). EDIHs offer SMEs subsidised or free
services such as test-before-invest, training and digitalisation advice.

The Single Market Programme continues COSME-type support for SME
competitiveness, including the Enterprise Europe Network (free advisory
services for SMEs on EU market access, partnering and funding) and actions on
access to finance.

InvestEU groups EU financial instruments: it does not give grants to SMEs
directly, but backs loans, guarantees and venture investments issued by
national promotional banks and private financial intermediaries. In practice
an SME accesses InvestEU-backed finance through its bank, which is also the
usual channel for guarantee-backed working-capital and growth loans.

Cohesion policy funds (in particular the European Regional Development Fund,
ERDF) finance a large share of SME support on the ground — regional grant
schemes for digitalisation, energy efficiency, and industrial modernisation
are typically ERDF co-financed and administered by national or regional
managing authorities, not by Brussels.
