---
title: EU SME definition (Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC)
source_url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32003H0361
source_type: eur-lex
language: en
---
Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC defines micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) for the purposes of EU law and funding programmes. The
category an enterprise falls into determines eligibility for most EU and
national SME support schemes.

The category of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises is made up of
enterprises which employ fewer than 250 persons and which have an annual
turnover not exceeding EUR 50 million, and/or an annual balance sheet total
not exceeding EUR 43 million.

Within the SME category, a small enterprise is defined as an enterprise which
employs fewer than 50 persons and whose annual turnover and/or annual balance
sheet total does not exceed EUR 10 million.

Within the SME category, a microenterprise is defined as an enterprise which
employs fewer than 10 persons and whose annual turnover and/or annual balance
sheet total does not exceed EUR 2 million.

Staff headcount is expressed in annual work units (AWU): anyone who worked
full-time within the enterprise, or on its behalf, during the entire reference
year counts as one unit; part-time staff, seasonal workers and those who did
not work the full year count as fractions of a unit.

An enterprise's status also depends on its relationships with other
enterprises. An autonomous enterprise holds less than 25% of the capital or
voting rights of another enterprise and vice versa. Partner enterprises
(holdings of 25% to 50%) and linked enterprises (control, typically over 50%)
must add a proportion of, or all of, the other enterprise's headcount and
financials to their own when checking the thresholds. This prevents large
groups from accessing SME support through small subsidiaries.

An enterprise that exceeds or falls below the thresholds only changes SME
status if this happens over two consecutive accounting periods, which protects
growing companies from abruptly losing SME benefits in a single good year.
