---
title: GDPR (Regulation (EU) 2016/679) — key articles for SMEs
source_url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679
source_type: eur-lex
language: en
---
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR). Curated
excerpts of the articles small and medium enterprises ask about most. The
authoritative text is the EUR-Lex source; this file is a faithful excerpt.

Article 3 — Territorial scope. The GDPR applies to the processing of personal
data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a
processor in the Union, regardless of whether the processing takes place in
the Union or not. It also applies to controllers or processors not established
in the Union where the processing relates to offering goods or services to
data subjects in the Union (irrespective of whether payment is required), or
to monitoring their behaviour as far as that behaviour takes place within the
Union. Company size does not matter for scope: a webshop of any headcount that
sells to customers in the Union processes personal data under the GDPR.

Article 6 — Lawfulness of processing. Processing is lawful only if and to the
extent that at least one of the following applies: (a) the data subject has
given consent to the processing for one or more specific purposes; (b)
processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data
subject is party, or to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to
entering into a contract; (c) processing is necessary for compliance with a
legal obligation to which the controller is subject; (d) processing is
necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or another
natural person; (e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task
carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority;
(f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests
pursued by the controller or a third party, except where such interests are
overridden by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data
subject, in particular where the data subject is a child.

Article 17 — Right to erasure ("right to be forgotten"). The data subject has
the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data
concerning him or her without undue delay where one of the following grounds
applies: the personal data are no longer necessary in relation to the purposes
for which they were collected; the data subject withdraws consent and there is
no other legal ground for the processing; the data subject objects to the
processing and there are no overriding legitimate grounds; the personal data
have been unlawfully processed; erasure is required for compliance with a
legal obligation in Union or Member State law; or the data were collected in
relation to the offer of information society services to a child.

Article 30 — Records of processing activities. Each controller shall maintain
a record of processing activities under its responsibility, including the
purposes of processing, categories of data subjects and personal data,
categories of recipients, envisaged time limits for erasure, and a general
description of security measures. Article 30(5) provides a derogation: this
obligation shall not apply to an enterprise or organisation employing fewer
than 250 persons — unless the processing it carries out is likely to result in
a risk to the rights and freedoms of data subjects, the processing is not
occasional, or the processing includes special categories of data (Article
9(1)) or personal data relating to criminal convictions and offences (Article
10). In practice, most businesses process employee and customer data more than
occasionally, so many SMEs still keep records for those processing activities.

Article 33 — Notification of a personal data breach to the supervisory
authority. In the case of a personal data breach, the controller shall without
undue delay and, where feasible, not later than 72 hours after having become
aware of it, notify the breach to the competent supervisory authority, unless
the breach is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of
natural persons. Where notification is not made within 72 hours, it shall be
accompanied by reasons for the delay. Processors must notify the controller
without undue delay after becoming aware of a breach.

Article 37 — Designation of the data protection officer. The controller and
the processor shall designate a data protection officer (DPO) in any case
where: (a) the processing is carried out by a public authority or body; (b)
the core activities of the controller or processor consist of processing
operations which require regular and systematic monitoring of data subjects
on a large scale; or (c) the core activities consist of processing on a large
scale of special categories of data (Article 9) or data relating to criminal
convictions (Article 10). Note: the GDPR sets no employee-count threshold for
the DPO duty — a 30-person company does not need a DPO merely because of its
size, but does if its core activities involve large-scale monitoring or
large-scale special-category data. Member State law may impose stricter rules
(for example, Germany's BDSG requires a DPO where, as a rule, at least 20
persons are constantly engaged in automated processing of personal data).
