---
title: National SME funding schemes — Germany (KfW) and France (Bpifrance)
source_url: https://www.kfw.de/inlandsfoerderung/Unternehmen/
source_type: national-scheme
language: en
---
Headline national funding channels for SMEs in Germany and France. Snapshot
for orientation — programme terms change; the operator's site is
authoritative. (Germany: kfw.de; France: bpifrance.fr)

Germany — KfW (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau) is the federal promotional
bank. SMEs do not apply to KfW directly: applications go through the
company's house bank (Hausbankprinzip), which passes the loan through and
shares the risk.

ERP Gründerkredit – StartGeld: promotional loan of up to EUR 125,000 for
founders and young enterprises (up to five years after formation), covering
investments and working capital, with KfW assuming a large share of the house
bank's risk — which makes financing accessible to companies without much
collateral.

ERP-Förderkredit KMU: the general promotional loan programme for established
SMEs, financing investments and working capital at favourable interest rates,
with repayment-free start years. Variants exist for ventures in regional
assistance areas.

KfW also operates programmes for digitalisation and innovation
(ERP-Digitalisierungs- und Innovationskredit) and for energy efficiency and
climate action in companies (Bundesförderung für effiziente Gebäude and
Klimaschutzoffensive für den Mittelstand). Grant-type support for consulting
(Förderung unternehmerischen Know-hows, via BAFA) complements the loans.

France — Bpifrance is the French public investment bank and the single
counter for state SME support: loans, guarantees, innovation grants and
equity.

Prêt Croissance and related growth loans finance intangible investments and
working capital needs of SMEs, typically without collateral on the company's
assets or personal guarantees from the founder — designed to sit alongside a
matching bank loan.

Bourse French Tech and the aides à l'innovation provide grants and repayable
advances for innovative startups and SMEs (feasibility studies, R&D and
prototyping), administered through Bpifrance's regional offices.

Bpifrance guarantees (Garantie de projets) cover a significant share of a
commercial bank's risk on SME loans for creation, transmission or
international development — the SME's bank applies for the guarantee.
